[Music]
we've been getting a lot of questions
about burnout and given that I just got
back from a long Festival weekend with
no sleep and 120 degree daytime
temperatures and during your final week
before your month-long time off
to uh to rest and recover I figured this
might be a perfect time for both of us
to to go into this yeah absolutely
absolutely
this is definitely the time of year
where I am most likely
to be a little burnt out a little tired
yeah it's great great timing
yeah
okay so
exactly exactly so so from this from
this grounded centered place that you
must be in 100 of the time
tell me what is
what is it that you refer to when you
talk about the burnout cycle just so I
can get people on the same page yeah so
I would think about it in three
different ways so let's talk about the
nervous system way first
so I remember when I was running my
first company and I went to an
acupuncturist I lived in a place and
this one was like go see this
acupuncturist and this is a while back
and I was like acupuncture what the hell
is that and so went and this doctor was
amazing and he you know basically gave
me something called adaptogens to help
my adrenals uh recover
and he didn't say he just said take
these and I said if you are a western
doctor what would you do and he said oh
what would happen is you would
uh drink a lot of coffee and then
eventually you get depressed
and then I'd put you on antidepressants
and this was before
people in the western people would put
um would give anti-anxiety medication to
depressed people and so in his world the
way it worked was that
you get anxious your adrenals expand
expand expand and when they start drying
up you go to coffee and if you drop even
more you're depressed
and so that's what I would say on a
physiological
system that's how it works is that
the lack of adrenaline leads to this
like burnout and so that that's how I'd
describe it there if I was describing it
from like the psychological or the the
human brain or the prefrontal cortex
brain
I think about it as
um
for whatever reason you're constantly in
a fight or flight situation you've
created things where you have to do
things instead of you get to do things
you should do things instead of you
want to do things it has to be at a
certain time has to be perfect whatever
it is
which constantly feels like a like
you're under attack like you're under
pressure and
uh and so if you go through life that
way
that's going to be all those
psychological things
are going to create the burnout and then
on the last piece of it and the
emotional system it's typically
not wanting to feel something
meaning that you're there's some emotion
that you're not wanting to feel and
therefore you're running from it and it
is that running from the emotion that
like creates a certain amount of
adrenaline in your system so so I would
say the burnout cycle is if you've been
running on adrenaline for your anxiety
for an extended period of time then
typically eventually you're going to
burn out
and so you see this all the time yeah
you see this all the time especially in
Corporate America yeah I noticed a
distinction here worth exploring between
running on and burning out from fear and
anxiety or just there being fear and
anxiety present in your life and I think
often often people have the perception
that the
that what's happening external around
them is the cause and if you actually
look across a population there's some
people who can be
living a lifestyle where others will be
burned out in and they are not and
there's some people who are living a
lifestyle where you're like how is this
person burned out from looking from the
outside but not without the view of what
their internal state is and how they're
psychologically relating to their life
into themselves yeah
the other way to think about this is you
know having been a venture capitalist
and a coach I've worked with a lot of
CEOs a lot of pressure run off of a lot
of adrenaline typically and when their
business they sell their business or
they leave their business I often see
them
stay in their pajamas for two years you
know so they they they just get they're
so burnt out from that running so hard
for so long that they just
basically are in a burnout the other
thing that's interesting is that we do
this assessment for folks and one of the
things it shows is and and I'm a little
bit that worked this way which is
the way that I recover is long
it like extended breaks of doing nothing
so I work really hard and then I recover
with these long extended breaks of doing
nothing which is what I'm about to do
for a month where I focus fully on just
physical well-being and and mental
well-being and so some people run like
that and some people are far more like
on a daily basis do the things that they
need I I do daily practices obviously
but I definitely need these long
things to be able to get back into
a place where I feel completely
resourced and ready and fresh yeah and
so that so I do that and some people
they just work their butt off for 10
years and then take two years and sit on
a couch and typically beat themselves up
but yeah or or an opposite direction
from the taking time off my coping
mechanism for a long time was
going into a very scary situation so
that the adrenaline made sense you know
people would call me an adrenaline
junkie but really I found out if I
didn't get out into the mountains if I
wasn't jumping if I wasn't doing
something that was scaring me on a
regular basis then the accumulated
background fear underneath my psyche
would become debilitating unless I had
an opportunity to burn some of that off
and I noticed that after after jumping
I'd be like wow I feel so grounded
nothing scares me right now because
nothing's quite as intense as what I
just experienced so I can get back to my
email and get some work done and things
are great until it started to build back
up again and the blow off yeah needed to
occur oh wow yeah that totally makes
sense the other I remember something
similar where I went to Alaska and you
know threw fish in Alaska or butchered
fish in Alaska for a summer
and we would work 100 and something
hours a week physical it was draining
like you were definitely running off of
adrenaline just because it it took so
much energy to do it and I remember when
we got out first thing I did was like
sleep for 20 something hours but then I
remember we went to Oregon and and one
of my favorite things to do was jump off
of uh things into water at the time and
I remember like jumping off of a bridge
and like no adrenaline I was like what
what just happened there's no adrenaline
from it and so we just kept on going
bigger and finally I did something so
big that I was like and I could feel the
whole adrenaline like you know suck the
last little adrenaline out of me so yeah
yeah totally understand that and and
because that felt
like refreshed in some way so yeah
so that that's what it is I would say
that's what I'd say the burnout cycle is
and and the reason I I it's really
important to me to talk about is because
so many Executives that I know are in
that place of burnout or about to be
burnt out and then when it happens the
the brain kind of caves in on itself you
don't see opportunities clearly you
don't
take enjoyment in your work it's just
very hard to
see things with the optimism that's
necessary often
and so how to think about it I think
it's really important for any kind of
sustained productivity yeah I think that
makes our self-reinforcing cycle like to
the extent that you have some
unprocessed unfelt fear in your system
as you start to get more and more burned
out then you're going to start seeing
things even more in that
in that kind of scary or pessimistic
catastrophizing light which will
increase the level of fear and yes going
back to that distinction of not just
that there's anxiety fear adrenaline
present in your life it's that you're
driven by it and it becomes the driving
force that eventually brings you to the
to the brink
yeah that's one of the many traps that
are available in in a meaning like
there's a sense of feeling alive that
comes with it and it can be exhilarating
and so you can do this thing that brings
that thrill and then at first it feels
really great like a cup of coffee like
the first time you drink a cup of coffee
it's like oh this feels really good and
then if you're drinking like three cups
every day then you notice the jittery's
things happening and then and then
pretty soon it's just you just need it
and so I think it's the same way that
that's one of the traps of it the other
trap is that a lot of people use it for
motivation I had a
really famous investor that I worked
with for a while and
and he just wouldn't do anything until
it became urgent
and and then then he would use the
urgency to motivate him and then the
whole team realized like urgency is what
motivates this person and so they would
create these urgencies and then they'd
be motivated but all it did was make him
more and more and more burnt out
and so so that's another thing is people
will use it as a form of motivation
rather than say enjoyment or inspiration
or
um or or Vision or any of those things
to find their motivation
Yeah Tim Urban of Waypoint y has this
really beautiful Ted Talk
um basically the the metaphor is that
there's like a monkey on your shoulder
and that monkey is the thing that like
motivates like so you find yourself just
very distracted up until the moment of
the deadline and then you use that
deadline to motivate yourself
and yeah it just seems like a very
common very common cycle I relate to it
so much through much of my life and the
the languaging around ADD ADHD very much
fits that pattern as well as many other
like depression anxiety yeah I I would
say that that those are some of the
things that keep you in that side of the
cycle the other thing that happens is
what keeps you in the other side of the
cycle so then you're burnt out then
you're in your pajamas then you're not
doing anything
and what happens is that your mind keeps
on attacking you you should really get
up you should really do this you should
really do that and it starts beating you
up which continues to create the
adrenaline because you're under attack
and so you're you're what you need is
just to rest and instead what you're
doing is sitting on the couch beating
yourself up and so I have noticed when a
CEO that I'm working with is done with a
big project and
they're not beating themselves up their
recovery time is like three four months
um similarly
if somebody is beating themselves up it
can be two three four five years
so that's a that's a pretty tremendous
difference
just in in how it keeps you stuck on the
other side through self-abuse yeah yeah
especially if you have if you have a
conflation between
relaxing and resting and laziness or
some kind of judgmental description of
it then yeah anytime your body wants to
recover
you're going to go into self-attack and
self-threat which is just gonna stymie
any attempts that your body wants to
recover leading you straight into
burnout
yeah yeah that's right yeah I was I was
talking to this Olympic train
olympically trained athlete and he was
saying that the best athletes that he
knows know how to recover really well
that they work really really hard and
then they do absolutely nothing
absolutely nothing to recover
and and and that it's this unknown
secret that the Olympic athletes will
train really really hard but the
recovery is really important
so I thought that was fascinating
what is what are some other traps around
this that people fall into that get them
stuck in the cycle
uh I think the other thing the other
trap that isn't particularly like what
keeps you in it but there is this idea
that people have which is
um but if I don't beat myself up if I
don't have a sense of urgency how will I
ever get anything done
and that is an amazing thought process
because you look at little kids and all
they do is do stuff and you look at mice
and all they do is do stuff and and it's
not like they're you know under this
idea of urgency it's just they're just
doing stuff and it's our nature to do
stuff but somehow or another in our
brain we get this idea that without
this motivation of urgency or without
this
beating self up that we won't get
anything done which is which is
interestingly true and not true so what
I mean to say there is that it's not
true at all however if you're burnt out
then there is some truth to it because
you're just kind of creating more of
that adrenaline High to get to to
something and so they see this with kids
who are who do this thing called
unschooling so if a kid burns out in
school they go to school and they're
just burnt out maybe because they feel
attacked by their teachers or maybe
because they feel attacked by the kids
or maybe because they're just under this
crazy stress
and they'll drop out and if they go into
this idea of unschooling one of the
things that they say to a kid is okay
you don't get to use any screen time but
you can do whatever else you want and
tell us when you want to start learning
again
and they will maybe read cartoons or
Comics or they'll you know maybe just
hang out or go off into the woods
they'll do all this stuff what they
won't do is screen time what they won't
do is is video games because those
aren't allowed because those increase
your adrenal fatigue
and
and it turns out that eventually usually
like four months six months later the
kids just totally want to learn again
and so there is this short-term thing of
not being motivated if you've been under
this sense of
urgency now that doesn't mean as an
adult we might not be able to take six
months off and we might be burnt out
and so then our other option is how do
we do things without the adrenaline and
so you have to start thinking about okay
here are the things I'm going to do but
I have to figure out ways to do them
without the adrenaline rush
which is one of the ways I help CEOs out
all the time is we look at the things
that
that drain them and we figure out ways
that they could do them that are
to feed to them directly makes them feel
better about their day
yeah and so we've been talking about
this in terms of burnout on an
individual level but you can also see a
lot of the same Dynamics play out in
society or in a company or in a movement
for example there's so much around
marketing or you know Grassroots
movements where yeah the the prevailing
wisdom is to hook into people's sense of
urgency
yes like we need this is a problem we
need to fix this problem if we don't fix
it the world is going to hell and yeah
like that there's that that kind of
message is prevailing everywhere
yeah and
so you we we all find ourselves walking
through life kind of being hit by a
bunch of these messages these arrows
like the environment this you know
social whatever that politics this
religion that yeah right and that would
tend to reinforce those cycles that we
have individually when our media is that
way but also if you are a CEO of a
company how do you bring that energy
into your product or not how do you
how do you create meaningful change in
the world
from a place of
you know whoever's with me on this needs
to buy into this fear and urgency place
and use that as a tool to hook other
people into our mission with us
and what is the alternative
yeah so I'm curious if you have any
reflection on that before I lead into
the
the next section on what we can do about
it
yeah that's a great great question
there's a couple things too I I've also
seen it somewhat on a societal level
where I notice that like if a society is
like all run up on an idea you know like
make as much money as you can and
cocaine fueled kind of caffeine fueled
expansion of on a societal level then
like you can just wait for that downturn
to happen in the economy
um so yeah I think it happens and I see
it happen in companies too and and
what's a fascinating thing is I've
literally watched somebody go from
burn out
just being free of uh several ideas and
then be inspired again like a CEO who's
like I'm done this sucks and then it's
like well do you have to deal with it
this way in this way are these
constraints real what if we take them
away and then oh wow I'm excited to do
this again
which is really a fascinating thing to
watch it's rare but I've seen it several
times where
what was actually the thing that was
taking all their adrenaline was some
false idea some limiting belief that
they have
right same in a relationship as well
yeah and I I just worked with a group of
CEOs and we did this exercise where I
said tell me the thing that takes the
most adrenaline that takes the most out
of you and we'll all ask them how what
questions about
Alternatives alternative ways of doing
it that actually feed you and every
single one of them saw this breakthrough
of like oh I'm doing it in a way that
takes my energy I could be doing it in a
way that gives me energy
and I think that is the way you handle
it inside of a company and if a CEO
knows that if the CEO thinks I have to
push myself through to get through then
their company is going to feel the same
way if a CEO says oh it's more efficient
for me to figure out how to enjoy it
it's more efficient for me to
to get energy from everything that I do
then they'll start looking around seeing
how powerful that is and they'll they'll
organize their company that same way so
that the people in their company have
that same experience it'll be part of
the questions that are asked how do you
do your job how do you get these same
results but enjoy it twice as much
and it's funny because I will ask that
question when I go into to work with
teams one of the questions I ask is how
do you what could we do that would
double the results and what could we do
that would double the enjoyment
yeah and that also feels very relevant
for
uh business negotiations as well
ultimately
if you're if you want to work with
somebody and you guys are just drilling
into how
how we're going to get our senses of
urgency met rather than how we're going
to get our like deeper
spiritual and psychological needs and
that of our companies and our
organizations served by what we're doing
then you're missing some of the some of
the puzzle
yeah as a matter of fact this is like a
little golden thing for any anybody
negotiating
um when I talk to people about
negotiating for a position or for a job
I say there's three stages of the
negotiation the first is
how do you want to work together
that's the first stage because that
actually motivates everybody if there's
a match or or it pushes people away if
it's not a match which is perfect the
second is what are the resources you
need to actually do your job really
really well
and then the third is what's the salary
and I noticed that when it goes in that
position it's just Clarity the whole way
and or you get to a no quicker rather
than if what most people do is work on a
salary which is really not what
motivates us there's great studies on
this but
we most people would take a little less
money if they were three times as happy
in their job
right
yeah
so let's
let's kind of Zone this back into the
the individual level of burnout and talk
a little bit about what we can do
to avoid it or how can we work with it
or fall deep yeah in love with it
this one I don't know I mean if you're
in it then love it but the the I think
there are ways to just not get there and
I know there are ways to just not get
there
um
my one of my ways is to take significant
time off I'm I'm able to do that now I
wasn't at some point so I had other
methods
um
making sure that you have physical
Health like running or any kind of thing
that de-stresses the system that works
for you whether that's meditation or
yoga or
massage or whatever I think that's a
huge huge benefit
on a psychological level I would say
you know we have that the whole all the
podcasts from the master class and so
each one of those is a reduction in
Adrenaline so if you're operating from
your wants instead of your shoulds
there's less adrenaline that's happening
if you're operating from
um
how do I be authentic instead of how do
I improve myself you are absolutely
using less adrenaline so every one of
those are tools to use less adrenaline
and and then even on a more deep level
like if you always have to be on time
which is something that I have struggled
with
um
then usually that means there's a parent
who you got in trouble with if you
weren't on time and therefore you're
like running from meeting to meeting
that's a lot of adrenaline use how do
you how do you undo those psychological
components that constantly look at your
adrenaline use so instead of I think
there's a huge amount of
time and energy put towards time
management but I think energy management
is critical and
you can spend a lot more time if you're
really managing your energy well
and so that's another thing is to just
pay attention to when you're running on
adrenaline and what's creating that and
what's a way to do it where you're not
running on adrenaline to get that same
job done and if you problem solve there
then you have so much more energy
which is why I've done a lot of that
work and it's why I can work the way I
work at the speed in which I work and
not burn out that and taking a month off
every year is really really important to
get back to my physical wealth and
well-being yeah yeah it also feels like
a good dose of self-inquiry would be
helpful here where if if I'm running to
the meeting
I was like okay what am I afraid of I'm
afraid of being late to the meeting what
does that mean does that mean that if
I'm late to the meeting I feel like
I'm unworthy I'm gonna be yelled at and
not good enough but if I were to just a
message and say I'm gonna be five
minutes late and then show up much more
prepared for the meeting and less burned
out
you know is that like what what is it
that I'm actually concerned about when
when we have our all these fear stories
and
stress
stress triggers what is the actual
trigger that's going on
not just the surface level one but
what's the deeper one and what is it
that we actually need underneath that
that's right yeah so that's that's where
the head stuff comes in it's in the
shooting ourselves it's in the what are
the psychological things that make us
rush and and the best way to go about
that is just really look at where you're
spending that and how do you do it
differently is the way to do it
differently just to let people know I'm
running late is the way to do it
differently space give yourself 10
minutes between meetings
what is it what is the way to do it
differently and and that's one of the
things we sat with today where there's
folks who are like okay I have to have
conflict with somebody what's the way so
I have to run the sales meeting and I
hate it and I do it through adrenaline
it's like okay well how do we do this
and there was infinite in each one of
the CEOs who had the issue there was
literally infinite solutions at least
you know 20 inside of five minutes from
the other CEOs
who had all figured out
some way to do that thing in a way that
they enjoyed it so it's really cool when
you really see it when you're like oh
wow I can I can take anything that that
takes energy from me and figure out a
way to do it and that gives me energy or
delegate it or whatever it is
it's pretty amazing to watch that
yeah and how about also on the side of
you you described earlier we we talked
about allowing the rest to actually
occur how about like welcoming the
experience of being tired maybe not like
burned out but just noticing like when
you feel burned out what does that feel
like I feel tired I feel like not doing
anything
I feel
XYZ and then doing the emotional inquiry
on those feelings including even just
the physical sensation of tiredness okay
yeah the sensation of tiredness is my
body signaling that it needs to recover
in fact it may actually be a direct
signal for recovery
yeah is that yeah yeah sleeping is a
feeling of tiredness essentially that is
an actual recovery so yeah if we if we
kind of flip the script on how we see
those signals and recognize that they're
actually reparative and not necessarily
a sign that we're doing it wrong then
that that can allow the deeper
restfulness to arise when it's needed
yeah there's definitely
some people just resist feeling tired
oftentimes also we've been running
really hard we've been
compartmentalizing feelings
we've been like not paying attention to
the sadness and the fear and so there's
a lot of that backlog that just needs to
move and if you resist moving it you're
gonna take a longer time to recover
the other thing that I a little trick
I'll play on folks is
um see as I'll be like okay how do we
measure how well you're resting
um like I I are you going to be the best
at resting are you going to be kind of a
half asset like what's going on here and
I will literally like flip the script on
them in such a way that like to rest
well
is an accomplishment because it is it is
not an easy thing to do is to rest well
like we we think it is but most folks
don't and it's some some combination of
taking care of a physical body taking
care of the nutrition taking care of
the the self-talk it's like a very
aesthetic thing to really rest well
and and to support yourself in it and so
if we start like looking at those
metrics and then we say okay well let's
see how well you meet your goal of
resting well
it can totally change the whole dynamic
in the head I mean it's a shortcut but
it works you know it gives them some way
of being able to feel like they've done
something meaningful
yeah and to kind of flip that to the
other side of the spectrum if you can
rest well what would it mean to fear
well for example if you find yourself in
that elevated State how much resistance
is there in it
and you know fear can become excitement
like fear is excitement without the
breath and so if yeah when you are
finding yourself in the elevated State
and everyone's at the board meeting and
they're doing whatever and politicking
or like trying to get their thing met
and you're running out of time
and you're elevated how do you how do
you allow that to move through to a
really clean energetic flow of
excitement and determination and fully
showing up
yeah and how much how much more energy
efficient is that
yeah and the other way which is one of
the things that people have a problem
with resting is they start feeling good
and then they're like oh that scares me
that level of exuberance or excitement
or peace scares me so I have to so same
thing on the rest cycle how do you
really allow yourself to feel great in
it
um and not just immediately rush back to
to the work at hand yeah which is why I
have this I have this because like in
this month in about a week and a half
into the month I'll be I'll 100 ideas
and a whole bunch of stuff that I want
to do and I'll have the energy to do it
and I know that if I actually prolong
that rest period if I actually
sit with all that excitement and
exuberance and I and I move through that
into like deeper states of peace and joy
and slowness I am so much more effective
so I actually extend my rest time once a
year so that I can
go beyond the state of oh I'm ready to
do work again and go into
states of much deeper peace and joy
because from that place I I do so much
my work is so much better
what I do in the world how I do it how
quickly I do it all improve remarkably
yeah yeah I've noticed myself too if I
take
if I take like a week backpacking
halfway through I've got a million ideas
and I'm ready to go with them and then
the second half of the week is where a
lot of the magic really happens
and I think a lot of that comes from the
the celebration and the gratitude
all right yeah there's there's time to
just sit with how good it feels
to a feel this way
B continue to reflect on my mission my
purpose my
my enjoyment
and then
third just to to be with it without
in a Wilderness it's not possible to do
anything with my email or whatever
um and just have the gratitude for
all that is actually present right now
without it needing to be contingent upon
my actual execution
and so I think gratitude I'm curious how
how you would bring gratitude into this
as well I can totally see how the
Gratitude would be helpful and what I
notice is that when I'm rested and I'm
resource gratitude is
Wellspring it's just what happens
continually like that's the most common
thought when I'm rested nor one of the
most common thoughts when I'm rested is
just oh wow I'm so grateful I'm so lucky
I feel so privileged
yeah
wow cool I'm really grateful for this
conversation
um too what a great one
yeah I'm grateful to all of our
listeners
yeah thank you all for just showing up
yeah if you enjoyed this episode please
share it just pick one person uh that's
my invitation pick one person you think
would love it and send it to them only
if you only if you would enjoy that and
uh you can find us on Twitter at Art of
a comp or hit us up at Art of
accomplishment.com find a contact form
shoot us a question uh
come take a course
awesome thanks Brett see you next time
yeah thanks see you next time thanks
everybody all right bye
foreign